# 16S_pipe_metabioinfomics
## Pipeline for the analysis of 16S rRNA data 


The aim of this pipeline is to generate 16S rRNA data from next generation of Illumina sequences. The first part of the pipeline is in the R language, a modified version of the DADA2 tutorial pipeline (https://benjjneb.github.io/dada2/tutorial.html). The second part takes the results of the R pipeline and, through custom Python scripts, generates a table with the differentially expressed species in different conditions, including graphs and supporting elements for the analysis.

## Installation and usage
Clone the following repository in your environment. 
Install the following R packages: Rcpp, dada2, fastqcr, ShortRead, Biostrings, phyloseq, MicrobiotaProcess, ggplot2, ranacapa, string, devtools 
Install the following Python packages: pandas, numpy, matplotlib.pyplot, openpyxl, os
Install cutadapt.
Follow the R script by specifying the working folder(where the data will be saved), the number of threads to be used by certain functions, the path to your reads(in .fastq.gz format), and the database to use(SILVA or UNITE).
Create an excel file titled "Campioni.xlsx" where you have three columns: "Nome", "Replica"	"Nome file fastq (forward reads)". In the first columns, you will specify the condition of interest for each sample taken in  exam. In the second, you have a unique numerical ID of the sample, and  in the last column, the name of the fastq file associated with that sample.
Open the "main.py" file and modify the input and output folder accordingly. Run the script.

## Output
The R part of the script returns a series of folders:
-fastqc: contains the results of fastqc before and after trimming the reads (to control if the trimming was successful and the reads are of sufficient quality)
-cutadapt: contains the reads filtered by cutadapt (so you can resume the pipeline there in order to modify the script down the line to avoid refiltering and retrimming)
-dada2_results: contains the files generated by dada2, including the input for phyloseq
-phyloseq: contains the results of the phyloseq analysis, including alpha and beta diversity results
The python script returns a table and a series of images that summarize the single tables generated by the previous R script in a more straighforward format that is easily interpretable.

##Credit
Victor Borin Centurion for setting up and modifying the R pipeline.
Lucas Cappelletti for the generation of the Python scripts and graphs.
Edoardo Bizzotto for polishing the pipeline and automatizing the process.
